Blog post for Shiny app vignette: notes

I'd like to tell a little story that illustrates how R helps make open science and reproducibility possible. All of that is only possible with the community of great people that work on R. We had a problem which was solved with the help of the R community, and I was able to get more bang for my buck: the work I did is now part of a package that anyone can access. That's more efficient and speeds the pace of research!

Bethany and Nicole wanted people to be able to better visualize the results of their review of studies that assess outcomes of interdisciplinary research. 

They categorized over 1000 studies with about 15 different attributes. Some of the attributes could have two values, while others could have over a dozen. It's hard to visualize all that at once. So I took a static graph that Kelly H made, and turned it into an interactive visualization. It's a Shiny app that you can check out on the SESYNC server. 

I ran into the issue where we liked the look of the flow diagram made with ggalluvial package the best, but liked the feature on googleVis where you can hover over the plot and get information in a "tooltip" about what you're hovering over. 

So I wrote up a bit of a hacky way to do that. It involves using the coordinates of the mouse pointer and the polygons defining the swoopy loopy flow paths in the flow diagram to calculate whether the mouse is hovering over a flow path, one of the node boxes connecting the flow paths, or neither. A little box appears next to the mouse pointer showing information about the path the mouse is over. 

There were a lot of little headaches involved in figuring out how to get this to work just so, which I won't go into detail about. I had to contact Cory, the developer of the package, through an issue on github.com for help while I was working on it. After I was done, he encouraged me to write a vignette (article with an example of how to use an R package, that is part of its documentation for users). Then that became a pull request (I submitted my changes to the code in his package repo, which now includes the vignette.) After some editing back and forth, he accepted the PR and the vignette is now part of the package.

This demonstrates quite a few nice things about the open source life: I could easily combine code from a couple different packages to get the result I wanted, I could delve into the source code of the R packages and see exactly how everything works, I was able to communicate with the developer to get help, and I was able to get more mileage out of the work I did because it is now benefiting others that might want to do the same thing, saving them the headaches I had to go through! Altogether this is a major endorsement for open science and reproducibility with R.